README.md, before:

# PyTRMS

This is the official **Ionicon** Python toolbox for proton-transfer reaction mass-spectrometry (PTR-MS).


## Lab automation

Write simple Python scripts to automate your measurement process and get repeatable
results!

For example, to perform ten measurements of one minute each and count up the
filename:
```python
import pytrms

ptr = pytrms.webclient()

measurement = ptr.Measure(r'D:\Data\one_minute_each')

for i in range(10):
    measurement.repeat_for(60)
```

## Postprocessing and Pandas compatibility

For simple analysis tasks, use the Python package to read and analyse the *hdf5*
files:

```python
import glob
import pandas as pd
import pytrms

batch = pytrms.PostProcessor()
for filename in glob.rec('D:/Data/my_experiment/*.h5'):
	batch.add(filename)  # or later maybe batch.gather_datafiles()

print(batch)  # the datafiles are sorted by their time of measurement

average = pd.DataFrame()

for file in batch:
	dataframe = file.traces  # traces are available as Pandas dataframe
	dataframe.write_csv(file.basename + '_avg.tsv', sep='\t')

	average.append(dataframe.avg())

average.write_csv('grand_average.tsv', sep='\t')
```

## Iteration and trace lookup

```python
import pytrms

file = pytrms.DataFile('/home/ionicon/data/foo.h5')

print(file.find('H2o_max'))  # find traces by name..
print(file.find(42.1234))  # ..or by closest exact mass

for row in file.iterrows():  # the DataFile behaves similar to a Pandas dataframe
	print(row.keys)
```

## Getting started

Download and install the latest Python version if you have not done so. **Ionicon**
recommends to [download Python 3.9 for Windows](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.9.12/python-3.9.12-amd64.exe).
This will install the Python executable along with the package manager *pip*. 
Using *pip* is the preferred way to get the latest version of *PyTRMS*, but other
solutions like *Anaconda* should also work. In a terminal type

```
python -m pip install --upgrade pytrms
```

to install the latest release from *PyPI*. This command can also be used at any later
time to upgrade to the newest version.


### Running the examples

This assumes you have a **Ionicon PTR-MS** connected to your PC and running the 
**ioniTOF** server with the **Ionicon webAPI**. 

Download and extract the examples folder (by clicking on `Code` and selecting
`Download ZIP` from the dropdown menu).
The Python scripts can be run by simply double-clicking them.
If something is not working correctly, the setup may be broken. 
Repeat the steps from the [Getting started](https://github.com/ionicon-analytik/PyTRMS#getting-started)
section and make sure to use the default options.

Commit message:

The 'Measurement' can easily be used as a context manager.

README.md, after:

# PyTRMS

This is the official **Ionicon** Python toolbox for proton-transfer reaction mass-spectrometry (PTR-MS).


## Lab automation

Write simple Python scripts to automate your measurement process and get repeatable
results!

For example, to perform ten measurements of one minute each and count up the
filename:
```python
import pytrms

ptr = pytrms.webclient()

measurement = ptr.Measure(r'D:\Data\one_minute_each')

for i in range(10):
    measurement.repeat_for(60)
```

## Postprocessing and Pandas compatibility

For simple analysis tasks, use the Python package to read and analyse the *hdf5*
files:

```python
import glob
import pandas as pd
import pytrms

batch = pytrms.PostProcessor()
for filename in glob.rec('D:/Data/my_experiment/*.h5'):
	batch.add(filename)  # or later maybe batch.gather_datafiles()

print(batch)  # the datafiles are sorted by their time of measurement

average = pd.DataFrame()

for file in batch:
	dataframe = file.traces  # traces are available as Pandas dataframe
	dataframe.write_csv(file.basename + '_avg.tsv', sep='\t')

	average.append(dataframe.avg())

average.write_csv('grand_average.tsv', sep='\t')
```

## Iteration and trace lookup

```python
import pytrms

file = pytrms.DataFile('/home/ionicon/data/foo.h5')

print(file.find('H2o_max'))  # find traces by name..
print(file.find(42.1234))  # ..or by closest exact mass

for row in file.iterrows():  # the DataFile behaves similar to a Pandas dataframe
	print(row.keys)
```

## Use as a context manager

The `Measurement` serves as a context in which the experiment is running:

```python
import pytrms

meas = pytrms.measure(host='localhost')

print(meas)  # prints PrepareMeasurement

with meas as running:
    print(meas)  # prints RunningMeasurement
    meas.wait(3)

print(meas)  # prints FinishedMeasurement
```

## Getting started

Download and install the latest Python version if you have not done so. **Ionicon**
recommends to [download Python 3.9 for Windows](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.9.12/python-3.9.12-amd64.exe).
This will install the Python executable along with the package manager *pip*. 
Using *pip* is the preferred way to get the latest version of *PyTRMS*, but other
solutions like *Anaconda* should also work. In a terminal type

```
python -m pip install --upgrade pytrms
```

to install the latest release from *PyPI*. This command can also be used at any later
time to upgrade to the newest version.


### Running the examples

This assumes you have a **Ionicon PTR-MS** connected to your PC and running the 
**ioniTOF** server with the **Ionicon webAPI**. 

Download and extract the examples folder (by clicking on `Code` and selecting
`Download ZIP` from the dropdown menu).
The Python scripts can be run by simply double-clicking them.
If something is not working correctly, the setup may be broken. 
Repeat the steps from the [Getting started](https://github.com/ionicon-analytik/PyTRMS#getting-started)
section and make sure to use the default options.
